When we try to think logically, there are pitfalls we all need to be aware of. Most of these things are bunched up in the category of cognitive biases. Having bias just means you’re playing favorites- whether you know it or not. “Cognitive” is anything to do with thinking or learning. Put them together, and you know that cognitive bias is playing favorites with your thoughts. If you want to be allowed to go to a concert on your own, you may point to all the times you’ve walked home from school safely- and not mention the times you went to a friend’s house instead. That is an example of exhibiting bias for your own benefit. The list of cognitive biases is long, but there are a few that are particularly nasty.

 One of those is confirmation bias. We all know the rhyme that starts “Roses are red, violets are blue”. Confirmation bias occurs when you remember Valentine’s Day, when you see a lot of red roses- and you don’t pay attention to any of the times you see yellow or white roses. So you are confirming the statement you already know- that roses are red- without noting that roses can be other colors, too. Many cognitive biases come from the human desire to keep believing the same thing. There is a lot of information out there! So it is natural for us to only look for information that we think is important to us- that is, information about the things we already care about. Wanting to keep believing the same things is called cognitive inertia. The rhyme also tells us that “violets are blue”. But it might startle some of us to hear that violets are usually purple.  As we can all be stubborn sometimes, you might say “Well, they look blue to me”. It can be hard to change your mind after such definitive statement, even if someone shows you a picture of purple violets, or gets others to tell you that they’ve seen purple violets, too. You may even think to yourself, even if you’ve never thought about it much before, “Violets are definitely blue, I’ve seen it myself”. When you still believe something even more after someone shows you that something is wrong, that is called the backfire effect.

There may be a whole lot of information out there, but we don’t always have it when we need it. It is natural to fill in the gaps with our own experiences, and that is an important ability. But it also leads to assumptions, and bad conclusions. The bandwagon effect is a great example of this. You may have a backpack that’s lasted a few years, and is still working- no broken zippers, no tears on the bottom. But if everyone suddenly has a different brand of backpack- you might assume that that backpack is much better, because it has such a big following. Is the new backpack going to last as long, or make you happier? Probably not! But the assumption that the majority- everyone who already has the backpack- cannot be wrong is what makes the bandwagon effect. 

We also often need to make quick decisions based on the information we have.  It’s easy for us to choose the thing that is most important to us, or that we have invested time into. A great example is the IKEA effect- we all place more value on something we have helped created, compared to something “ready-made”. You could certainly get a cake from a store, and it would definitely taste good. But if a friend offers to make you a birthday cake, you’d probably value that gift a lot more. We also tend to chose the simplest-looking solution, regardless of actual implications. I could choose to summarize everything we’ve already talked to in this video, and it might help you all remember what you’ve learned. But it looks a lot simpler to just sign off, so: Thanks for watching, you’ll be seeing plenty more coming from this channel in the near future. If you have questions, leave us a comment, or check out the resources in the description below. Keep learning! 


